documentation/oo_deployment_guide_vm.adoc, before:

= OpenShift Origin Virtual Machine Deployment Guide
OpenShift Origin Documentation Project <dev@lists.openshift.redhat.com>
v2.0, July 2013
:data-uri:
:toc2:
:icons:
:numbered:
:toclevels: 3

This document describes the process of setting up a VM running an
OpenShift development environment inside VirtualBox.

You need to have a virtualization application such as KVM, or VirtuaBox installed on your
workstation and you will need at least 25GB of free disk space. The compressed download is 
about 1.3GB and when you unpack it the resulting image file is almost 4GB vmdk file or 20 GB
uncompressed RAW disk file (Linux only).

== Download VM

Download the VM from the OpenShift "mirrors" site:

----
wget https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/origin-server/release/2/images/openshift-origin.zip
----

== Unpack VM files

The download package is a bzip2 compressed tar archive. Unpack it with tar:

----
tar -xjvf openshift-origin.tbz2
----

This can take quite a while.  The files being uncompressed are pretty
large.  The result will be the creation of four additional files:

----
$ ls -1t
openshift-origin.tbz2
openshift-origin.ovf
openshift-origin.tdl
openshift-origin.vmdk
openshift-origin.vmx
----

== Configure mDNS

The VM image is configured to use link:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MDNS[mDNS] to provide DNS name resolution so that
your browser and RHC client can resolve the URL of the broker and applications running on the VM. mDNS services are built-in
on MacOSX (bonjour) and Windows (zeroconf) system and require a few addition steps on Fedora 19 or other linux based systems.

Install the mdns resolver RPM:

----
yum install -y nss-mdns
----

Edit your _/etc/nsswitch.conf_ file. Search for a list beginning with *"hosts:"* and add *mdns4* to the end of the line. 
After the edit, it should look like:

----
hosts:      files mdns4_minimal [NOTFOUND=return] dns myhostname mdns4
----

This will allow your browser and RHC client to properly resolve the hostname and application URLs.

== Set up the Virtual Machine

The base VM image is distributed as a VMDK file and will run on a
variety of virtualization technologies. Specific setup instructions
are included below. Skip down to the one you intend to use.

* xref:kvm[libvirt/KVM] - Kernel Virtual Machine (Linux)
* xref:virtualbox[VirtualBox] - Process based virtualization (Linux, Windows, MacOS)



[[kvm]]
=== KVM

KVM or "Kernel Virtual Machine" (aka libvirt) is a Linux native
virtualization mechanism.  With KVM/libvirt installed on a Linux host
you can run virtual machines for any Ix86 or x86_64 based operating
system.

==== Installing KVM Tools

Start by installing the KVM/libvirt RPMs:

----
yum install -y virt-manager libvirt
----

NOTE: This step may take a while depending on the speed of your internet connection.

==== Convert The Image

KVM requires a RAW disk image file. We can use _qemu-img_ command to convert the VMDK image to RAW format.

Install the _qemu-img_ RPM:

----
yum install -y qemu-img
----

Run _qemu-img_ to convert the image file and then copy it into the libvirt directory.

----
qemu-img convert -O raw openshift-origin.vmdk openshift-origin.dsk
mv openshift-origin.dsk /var/lib/libvirt/images/
----

==== Create New VM

Ensure that _libvirt_ is running:

----
service libvirtd start
----

Start virt-manager on the command line:

----
virt-manager
----

Once virt-manager starts, click on the "Create a new virtual machine" icon or right click on localhost and select _New_.

image:virt_manager_start.png[image]

Enter "openshift_origin" as the name of the virtual machine, select "Import existing disk image" and click "Forward".

image:virt_manager_step_1.png[image]

==== Select VM Disk Image

Select "Linux" as the "OS Type" and "Fedora 19" as the version then click "Browse..." to select the disk image.

image:virt_manager_step_2.png[image]

Select the "openshift-origin.dsk" image and click "Choose Volume"

image:virt_manager_select_image.png[image]

Once you are back to the setup screen, click "Forward".

==== Set VM Memory Size

Set the memory size to something reasonably large. 1GB should be a good start. Click the "Forward" button.

image:virt_manager_step_3.png[image]

==== Set VM Memory Size

Select "Virtual Network 'default': NAT" network and click Finish to start the VM.

image:virt_manager_step_4.png[image]

==== Starting the VM

When the VM has finished booting. It will go through some initialization:

image:virt_manager_vm_starting.png[image]

And then present you with the URL and credentials to connect to your OpenShift Origin VM.

image:virt_manager_vm_running.png[image]

[[virtualbox]]
=== VirtualBox


VirtualBox is a process based virtual machine system.

You can start VirtualBox either by clicking on the desktop item in the
startup menus or from the command line:

----
$ virtualbox &
----

==== Create New VM

When you start VirtualBox and you should see the welcome page. Click
the New button in the upper left to begin the process of creating
creating a new VM and importing the OpenShift virtual disk.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_new_vm.png[image]

Fill in the name. It feels like VirtualBox knows that things called
"OpenShift" will be Linux, but you should change the version to
Fedora (64 bit) and click Next.

==== Set VM Memory Size

VirtualBox gives some of your computer's memory to the virtual
machine. You want it to be large enough so that the machine runs well,
but not so large that it consumes all of your computer's memory. 

Set the memory size to something reasonably large.  1GB should be a
good start.  Click the Next button.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_memsize.png[image]

==== Select VM "Hard Drive" Image

Normally Virtualbox will create a new virtual hard drive for you.  In
this case you want to select the virtual disk image which contains the
OpenShift Origin virtual machine.

Check the radio button labeled
"Use an existing virtual hard drive file" and click the little folder
icon with the green circumflex in the lower right corner.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_select_vhd.png[image]

VirtualBox will present a file selection dialog. Browse to find the
"openshift-origin.vmdk" file and select it.  Press the button labeled 
"Open".

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_select_vhd_dialog.png[image]

Press the button labeled "Open".

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_select_vhd_create.png[image]

When the disk has been selected click "Create". VirtualBox will create
the stopped virtual machine and present the VM manager display.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_vm_prestart.png[image]

==== Select Bridged Networking

By default VirtualBox uses Network Address Translation (NAT) to create a
virtual network interface for your virtual machines. NAT will not let
you connect back into your virtual machine.  You need to change the
network adaptor configuration to use Bridged networking.  Then your
virtual machine will get an IP address from your DHCP server, and you
will be able to use that address to browse or log in.

Highlight the OpenShift virtual machine (if it's the only one, it will
be already) and click the Settings icon (shaped like a gear) in the
upper left corner.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_config_network_dialog.png[image]

Each system may have different names for the network adaptor.  Find
yours in the pulldown menu labeled "Attached to:".  Select it and
press the OK button.  You'll return to the main display ready to start
the VM.

Highlight the OpenShift Origin VM in the left hand column and click
the "Start" button.  VirtualBox will display the VM console as a black
window and you can observe the boot process.

Virtualbox may show several informational dialog messages during
startup about "Auto capture keyboard" and "mouse pointer
integration". It is safe to click them away and to check the "don't
show me again" box when you do.

When the VM has completed booting VirtualBox will display the access
information for the VM and prompt you to start a root console.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_console_banner.png[image]

The first line shows the URL you can use from your local browser to
reach the OpenShift console. The username and password are on the next
two lines. The next group shows the access information to the VM using
SSH to get a command line shell on the VM. Note these values as you
will need them to access the VM.

When you press any key the console shell will start.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_console_shell.png[image]

== Accessing the Virtual Machine

When the VM is running it is accessable from the host machine either
using the OpenShift console via a web browser or on a command line
interface using SSH.  The web interface is useful for easily managing
applications while the CLI allows the user to write and test
applications and components.  The web browser will also be used to
verify the test applications during development.

=== User Accounts

There are two user accounts which are used to access the OpenShift
Origin VM.  Both are displayed on the VM console when it boots as
shown in the examples above. 

The first one is the OpenShift service account.  This is used to
access the web console and to run the `rhc` CLI commands as a
developer.  

* Username: admin 
* Password: admin

The second account is the developer account.  This is a UNIX account
which is used to log into the OpenShift VM via SSH. It provides a work space
for exploring the CLI and development environment of OpenShift Origin.

* Username: openshift
* Password: openshift

If you try logging in with one of thse and it fails, try using the
other.

=== Using a browser to view the OpenShift Console

When the VM is running you can use the OpenShift Console to create and
manage applications in the VM.  Enter the URL from the CLI boot
console into your browser.  Enter the username and password when
prompted.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_oo_console.png[image]

=== Using SSH to log into the VM

Most of the OpenShift workflow for application development is done
from the command line.  The OpenShift VM has an account created and
populated with the tools needed to create, manage and develop apps for
demonstration purposes.

The user reaches the command line on the VM using SSH from the host.

----
$ ssh openshift@broker.openshift.local
The authenticity of host 'broker.openshift.local (10.18.17.93)' can't be established.
RSA key fingerprint is 4f:bd:75:14:c2:27:83:2d:9b:e0:a6:1a:00:d4:7b:f1.
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no)? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'broker.openshift.local,10.18.17.93' (RSA) to the list of known hosts.
openshift@broker.openshift.local's password: 
[openshift@broker ~]$ pwd
/home/openshift
[openshift@broker ~]$
----

At this point the user has access to the `rhc` command line tools for
managing OpenShift.

See the link:oo_user_guide.txt[OpenShift User's Guide]

== Summary

The steps above allow a user to download and run a self-contained
OpenShift service for development or demonstration purposes.  The
service runs in a VirtualBox virtual machine and is accessable to the
user on the host machine using the VirtualBox graphical console, by
SSH or with a local web browser to the OpenShift console and to any
applications that are created within the OpenShift service.

Commit message:

Fix deployment guide to use unzip over tbz2
Section 2 of the deployment guide states that the download package is in tbz2 format.  Actual format is zip.  This patch replaces references to 'tbz2' with 'zip' and replaces the unpack command with an appropriate command for zip.

documentation/oo_deployment_guide_vm.adoc, after:

= OpenShift Origin Virtual Machine Deployment Guide
OpenShift Origin Documentation Project <dev@lists.openshift.redhat.com>
v2.0, July 2013
:data-uri:
:toc2:
:icons:
:numbered:
:toclevels: 3

This document describes the process of setting up a VM running an
OpenShift development environment inside VirtualBox.

You need to have a virtualization application such as KVM, or VirtuaBox installed on your
workstation and you will need at least 25GB of free disk space. The compressed download is 
about 1.3GB and when you unpack it the resulting image file is almost 4GB vmdk file or 20 GB
uncompressed RAW disk file (Linux only).

== Download VM

Download the VM from the OpenShift "mirrors" site:

----
wget https://mirror.openshift.com/pub/origin-server/release/2/images/openshift-origin.zip
----

== Unpack VM files

The download package is a compressed zip file. Unpack it with unzip:

----
unzip openshift-origin.zip
----

This can take quite a while.  The files being uncompressed are pretty
large.  The result will be the creation of four additional files:

----
$ ls -1t
openshift-origin.tbz2
openshift-origin.ovf
openshift-origin.tdl
openshift-origin.vmdk
openshift-origin.vmx
----

== Configure mDNS

The VM image is configured to use link:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MDNS[mDNS] to provide DNS name resolution so that
your browser and RHC client can resolve the URL of the broker and applications running on the VM. mDNS services are built-in
on MacOSX (bonjour) and Windows (zeroconf) system and require a few addition steps on Fedora 19 or other linux based systems.

Install the mdns resolver RPM:

----
yum install -y nss-mdns
----

Edit your _/etc/nsswitch.conf_ file. Search for a list beginning with *"hosts:"* and add *mdns4* to the end of the line. 
After the edit, it should look like:

----
hosts:      files mdns4_minimal [NOTFOUND=return] dns myhostname mdns4
----

This will allow your browser and RHC client to properly resolve the hostname and application URLs.

== Set up the Virtual Machine

The base VM image is distributed as a VMDK file and will run on a
variety of virtualization technologies. Specific setup instructions
are included below. Skip down to the one you intend to use.

* xref:kvm[libvirt/KVM] - Kernel Virtual Machine (Linux)
* xref:virtualbox[VirtualBox] - Process based virtualization (Linux, Windows, MacOS)



[[kvm]]
=== KVM

KVM or "Kernel Virtual Machine" (aka libvirt) is a Linux native
virtualization mechanism.  With KVM/libvirt installed on a Linux host
you can run virtual machines for any Ix86 or x86_64 based operating
system.

==== Installing KVM Tools

Start by installing the KVM/libvirt RPMs:

----
yum install -y virt-manager libvirt
----

NOTE: This step may take a while depending on the speed of your internet connection.

==== Convert The Image

KVM requires a RAW disk image file. We can use _qemu-img_ command to convert the VMDK image to RAW format.

Install the _qemu-img_ RPM:

----
yum install -y qemu-img
----

Run _qemu-img_ to convert the image file and then copy it into the libvirt directory.

----
qemu-img convert -O raw openshift-origin.vmdk openshift-origin.dsk
mv openshift-origin.dsk /var/lib/libvirt/images/
----

==== Create New VM

Ensure that _libvirt_ is running:

----
service libvirtd start
----

Start virt-manager on the command line:

----
virt-manager
----

Once virt-manager starts, click on the "Create a new virtual machine" icon or right click on localhost and select _New_.

image:virt_manager_start.png[image]

Enter "openshift_origin" as the name of the virtual machine, select "Import existing disk image" and click "Forward".

image:virt_manager_step_1.png[image]

==== Select VM Disk Image

Select "Linux" as the "OS Type" and "Fedora 19" as the version then click "Browse..." to select the disk image.

image:virt_manager_step_2.png[image]

Select the "openshift-origin.dsk" image and click "Choose Volume"

image:virt_manager_select_image.png[image]

Once you are back to the setup screen, click "Forward".

==== Set VM Memory Size

Set the memory size to something reasonably large. 1GB should be a good start. Click the "Forward" button.

image:virt_manager_step_3.png[image]

==== Set VM Memory Size

Select "Virtual Network 'default': NAT" network and click Finish to start the VM.

image:virt_manager_step_4.png[image]

==== Starting the VM

When the VM has finished booting. It will go through some initialization:

image:virt_manager_vm_starting.png[image]

And then present you with the URL and credentials to connect to your OpenShift Origin VM.

image:virt_manager_vm_running.png[image]

[[virtualbox]]
=== VirtualBox


VirtualBox is a process based virtual machine system.

You can start VirtualBox either by clicking on the desktop item in the
startup menus or from the command line:

----
$ virtualbox &
----

==== Create New VM

When you start VirtualBox and you should see the welcome page. Click
the New button in the upper left to begin the process of creating
creating a new VM and importing the OpenShift virtual disk.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_new_vm.png[image]

Fill in the name. It feels like VirtualBox knows that things called
"OpenShift" will be Linux, but you should change the version to
Fedora (64 bit) and click Next.

==== Set VM Memory Size

VirtualBox gives some of your computer's memory to the virtual
machine. You want it to be large enough so that the machine runs well,
but not so large that it consumes all of your computer's memory. 

Set the memory size to something reasonably large.  1GB should be a
good start.  Click the Next button.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_memsize.png[image]

==== Select VM "Hard Drive" Image

Normally Virtualbox will create a new virtual hard drive for you.  In
this case you want to select the virtual disk image which contains the
OpenShift Origin virtual machine.

Check the radio button labeled
"Use an existing virtual hard drive file" and click the little folder
icon with the green circumflex in the lower right corner.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_select_vhd.png[image]

VirtualBox will present a file selection dialog. Browse to find the
"openshift-origin.vmdk" file and select it.  Press the button labeled 
"Open".

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_select_vhd_dialog.png[image]

Press the button labeled "Open".

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_select_vhd_create.png[image]

When the disk has been selected click "Create". VirtualBox will create
the stopped virtual machine and present the VM manager display.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_vm_prestart.png[image]

==== Select Bridged Networking

By default VirtualBox uses Network Address Translation (NAT) to create a
virtual network interface for your virtual machines. NAT will not let
you connect back into your virtual machine.  You need to change the
network adaptor configuration to use Bridged networking.  Then your
virtual machine will get an IP address from your DHCP server, and you
will be able to use that address to browse or log in.

Highlight the OpenShift virtual machine (if it's the only one, it will
be already) and click the Settings icon (shaped like a gear) in the
upper left corner.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_config_network_dialog.png[image]

Each system may have different names for the network adaptor.  Find
yours in the pulldown menu labeled "Attached to:".  Select it and
press the OK button.  You'll return to the main display ready to start
the VM.

Highlight the OpenShift Origin VM in the left hand column and click
the "Start" button.  VirtualBox will display the VM console as a black
window and you can observe the boot process.

Virtualbox may show several informational dialog messages during
startup about "Auto capture keyboard" and "mouse pointer
integration". It is safe to click them away and to check the "don't
show me again" box when you do.

When the VM has completed booting VirtualBox will display the access
information for the VM and prompt you to start a root console.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_console_banner.png[image]

The first line shows the URL you can use from your local browser to
reach the OpenShift console. The username and password are on the next
two lines. The next group shows the access information to the VM using
SSH to get a command line shell on the VM. Note these values as you
will need them to access the VM.

When you press any key the console shell will start.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_console_shell.png[image]

== Accessing the Virtual Machine

When the VM is running it is accessable from the host machine either
using the OpenShift console via a web browser or on a command line
interface using SSH.  The web interface is useful for easily managing
applications while the CLI allows the user to write and test
applications and components.  The web browser will also be used to
verify the test applications during development.

=== User Accounts

There are two user accounts which are used to access the OpenShift
Origin VM.  Both are displayed on the VM console when it boots as
shown in the examples above. 

The first one is the OpenShift service account.  This is used to
access the web console and to run the `rhc` CLI commands as a
developer.  

* Username: admin 
* Password: admin

The second account is the developer account.  This is a UNIX account
which is used to log into the OpenShift VM via SSH. It provides a work space
for exploring the CLI and development environment of OpenShift Origin.

* Username: openshift
* Password: openshift

If you try logging in with one of thse and it fails, try using the
other.

=== Using a browser to view the OpenShift Console

When the VM is running you can use the OpenShift Console to create and
manage applications in the VM.  Enter the URL from the CLI boot
console into your browser.  Enter the username and password when
prompted.

image:deployment_guide_vm/virtualbox_oo_console.png[image]

=== Using SSH to log into the VM

Most of the OpenShift workflow for application development is done
from the command line.  The OpenShift VM has an account created and
populated with the tools needed to create, manage and develop apps for
demonstration purposes.

The user reaches the command line on the VM using SSH from the host.

----
$ ssh openshift@broker.openshift.local
The authenticity of host 'broker.openshift.local (10.18.17.93)' can't be established.
RSA key fingerprint is 4f:bd:75:14:c2:27:83:2d:9b:e0:a6:1a:00:d4:7b:f1.
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no)? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'broker.openshift.local,10.18.17.93' (RSA) to the list of known hosts.
openshift@broker.openshift.local's password: 
[openshift@broker ~]$ pwd
/home/openshift
[openshift@broker ~]$
----

At this point the user has access to the `rhc` command line tools for
managing OpenShift.

See the link:oo_user_guide.txt[OpenShift User's Guide]

== Summary

The steps above allow a user to download and run a self-contained
OpenShift service for development or demonstration purposes.  The
service runs in a VirtualBox virtual machine and is accessable to the
user on the host machine using the VirtualBox graphical console, by
SSH or with a local web browser to the OpenShift console and to any
applications that are created within the OpenShift service.
